 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019 Annual Work Programme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 September 2018 | ESMA20-95-933 
Contents 
1  Foreword and general context 
2  Mission statement 
3 
2019 planned resources 
4  Work Programme 2019 
4.1 
Promoting supervisory convergence 
4.1.1 
Corporate Finance 
4.1.2 
Corporate Reporting 
4.1.3 
Investment Management 
4.1.4 
Investor Protection and Intermediaries 
4.1.5  Market Integrity and Market Data 
4.1.6 
Post-Trading 
4.1.7 
Secondary Markets 
4.1.8 
Cross-cutting supervisory convergence themes 
4.2 
Assessing risks to investors, markets and financial stability 
4.2.1 
Data Management and statistics 
4.2.2 
Risk Monitoring and Analysis 
4.2.3 
Financial Innovation and Product Risk Analysis 
4.3  Completing a single rulebook for EU financial markets 
4.3.1 
Corporate Finance 
4.3.2 
Corporate Reporting 
4.3.3 
Investment Management 
4.3.4 
Investor Protection and Intermediaries 
4.3.5  Market Integrity and Market Data 
4.3.6 
Post-Trading 
4.3.7 
Secondary Markets 
4.3.8 
Policy activity to support our supervisory mandates 
4.4  Directly supervising specific financial entities 
4.4.1 
Credit Rating Agencies 
4.4.2 
Trade Repositories 
4.4.3 
Securities Financing Transactions 
4.4.4 
Securitisation 
4.5 
ESMA as an organisation 
2 
 
 
 
4 
6 
6 
8 
8 
8 
9 
10 
11 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
15 
16 
17 
17 
17 
18 
19 
19 
20 
21 
21 
22 
23 
23 
24 
24 
25 
25 
4.5.1 
UK withdrawal from the European Union 
4.5.2 
Corporate Affairs 
4.5.3 
Legal 
4.5.4 
Facility Management 
4.5.5 
Finance and Procurement 
4.5.6 
Human Resources 
4.5.7 
Information and Communication Technologies 
Annex I. Human Resources 
Annex II. Draft budget 
Annex III. ESMA’s Key Performance Indicators 
Annex IV. Acronyms 
 
 
 
 
25 
26 
27 
27 
28 
28 
28 
29 
30 
31 
33 
3 
 
 
 
1  Foreword and general context 
ESMA was founded in 2011. In its initial set-up period up to 2015, ESMA focused on building 
a  single  rulebook  for  EU  financial  markets  and  on  establishing  itself  as  a  credible  direct 
supervisor.  In  accordance  with  ESMA’s  Strategic  Orientation  2016-2020  ESMA  has  now 
shifted its focus onto its other two activities: supervisory convergence and assessing risks in 
the financial markets. ESMA, along with the national competent authorities (NCAs), have come 
a  long  way  in  setting  up  the  necessary  supervisory  convergence  processes  and  working 
methods  for  identifying  areas  for  improved  convergence  and  setting  up  a  toolbox  for  taking 
action. In 2019, ESMA will continue on this line, as well as fulfilling its responsibilities stemming 
from the initiatives of the Capital Markets Union.  
In addition, ESMA will be taking on new direct supervisory responsibilities under the Securities 
Financing Transactions Regulation (SFTR) and the Securitisation Regulation, as well as new 
supervisory  convergence  powers  and 
the  European  Social 
Entrepreneurship  Funds  (EuSEF)  and  European  Venture  Capital  Funds  (EuVECA) 
Regulations. Moreover, ESMA is planning to support the Sustainable Finance through a set of 
priority  actions,  aiming 
integrate  environmental,  social  and  governance  (ESG) 
considerations as part of the investment chain.  
responsibilities  under 
to 
With regard to ESMA’s existing mandates, major work streams for 2019 include supervisory 
convergence work in the area of Prospectus, following the Level 2 work planned for 2018, as 
well as input to the Joint Committee sub-committee and supervisory convergence work on the 
Securitisation Regulation. The continued implementation of MiFID II and MiFIR will be a point 
of focus, in particular to meet the increasing demand for effective supervisory convergence, to 
analyse and manage the related data requirements, and to provide advice to the Commission 
on  the  retention  or  the  review  of  the  new  requirements.  ESMA  will  also  work  on  the  third-
country  regime  under  MiFIR  including,  among  other  tasks,  support  to  the  Commission  on 
equivalence assessments and concluding co-operation arrangements with third countries. 
As European regulator and supervisor of specific financial entities, ESMA will persistently and 
prudently continue its work in 2019 to support a smooth and resilient withdrawal of the UK from 
the  European  Union.  The  withdrawal  will  make  demands  on  ESMA,  and  NCAs,  in  terms  of 
supervisory convergence work, financial stability work as well as third-country policies, where 
ESMA  will  seek  to  ensure  appropriate  regulatory  and  supervisory  coverage  of  third-country 
entities.  In  March  2018,  a  political  agreement  was  reached  between  the  UK  and  EU  on 
transition  arrangements  until  end-2020  at  the  latest.  Legal  certainty  on  such  transition 
arrangements will only be obtained with the ratification of the UK and EU of the Withdrawal 
Agreement. ESMA will continue its preparedness planning based on all scenarios, including a 
no-deal scenario.  
Finally,  during  2017,  the  European  Commission  made  two  legislative  proposals  that,  if 
approved by the co-legislators in 2018, would significantly affect ESMA’s planning environment 
for  2019.  The  amendment  to  the  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR  2.2) 
proposal aims to enhance the supervision of third-country Central Counterparties (CCPs) and 
4 
 
 
 
make  the  supervision  of  EU  CCPs  more  coherent.  In  September  2017,  an  amendment  to 
ESMA’s founding Regulation, as part of a wider review of the European System of Financial 
Supervision (ESAs’ Review), was proposed. The ESAs’ Review proposal would set up a new 
governance and funding structure for ESMA, as well as new objectives, tasks and powers.  
Key priorities for ESMA in 2019:  
Supervisory 
Convergence
• Implementation of MiFID II / MiFIR, Prospectus 
and Securitisation
Assessing 
Risks
Single 
Rulebook
Direct 
Supervision
 
 
• Data requirements of MiFID II / MiFIR
• Capital Markets Union Action Plan and Fintech 
Action Plan
• Supervision of CRAs and TRs and registrations 
under the Securitisation Regulation and SFTR
 
5 
 
 
 
2  Mission statement 
ESMA’s  mission  is  to  enhance  investor  protection  and  promote  stable  and  orderly  financial 
markets. 
One mission: to enhance investor protection and promote stable and
orderly financial markets.
Three objectives: Investor Protection, Orderly Markets and Financial
Stability
Four activities:
(1) Promoting supervisory convergence
(2) Assessing risks to investors, markets and financial stability
(3) Completing a single rulebook for EU financial markets
(4) Directly supervising specific financial entities
 
3  2019 planned resources 
On  31  January  2018  ESMA  provided  a  multi-annual  ‘Programming  Document’  to  the  EU 
institutions. This included a multi-annual work programme with financial and staffing outlook 
for 2020 and 2021, as well as a detailed annual work programme with a budget and staffing 
request for 2019. ESMA’s resources for 2019 will become final once the EU budget as whole 
is decided upon at the end of 2018.  
In  accordance  with  its  2019  budget  request,  ESMA’s  2019  work  programme  is  based  on  a 
budget of €48,382,4581 and an establishment plan of 176 posts (2542 full time equivalents).  
                                                 
 
1 This total budget does not include an amount of €2,190,000 for projects delegated to ESMA from NCAs.  
2 In addition there are four Contract Agent and four Seconded National Expert positions specifically allocated to work on tasks 
delegated from the NCAs.  
6 
 
 
 
ESMA plans according to an activity-based method and allocate budgeted financial and staff 
resources per activity, rather than per functional cost or per internal management hierarchy. 
The  table  below  shows  an  overview  of  the  planned  allocation  of  resources  across  ESMA’s 
activities:  
Number of staff 
Number of staff 
Staffing3 
Activity 
Supervisory Convergence 
Risk Assessment 
Single Rulebook 
Direct Supervision 
Total4 
2018 
81 
47 
39 
65 
232 
2019 
% of 2019 total 
84 
48 
35 
87 
254 
33% 
19% 
14% 
34% 
100% 
Activity 
Supervisory Convergence 
Risk Assessment 
Single Rulebook 
Direct Supervision 
Total 
2018 (EUR) 
13,805,195 
10,217,442 
6,156,825 
11,707,508 
41,886,970 
Budget  
2019 (EUR) 
14,072,986 
13,319,619 
5,103,842 
15,886,011 
48,382,458 
% of 2019 total 
29% 
27% 
11% 
33% 
100% 
 
 
These figures reflect ESMA’s 2016-2020 Strategic Orientation, which described a shift from 
focussing on single rulebook work to ESMA,’s other activities notably supervisory convergence 
and risk assessment which is gradually taking place over the period. 
New tasks stemming from the EMIR 2.2 and ESAs’ Review proposals have not been detailed 
in the 2019 work programme, nor any other new tasks that have not yet been agreed. Once 
the  co-legislators  have  taken  a  decision,  the  detailed  implementation  of  the  new  tasks  and 
resources will be discussed with ESMA’s Management Board and Board of Supervisors before 
being included in a future version of the 2019 annual work programme.  
Additional tasks from SFTR, Securitisation Regulation, and EuVECA and EuSEF have been 
included  on  the  assumption  that  the  requested  additional  posts  for  these  mandates  are 
received in 2019.  
 
 
                                                 
 
3 Staff = Temporary Agents, Contract Agents and Seconded National Experts. 
4 All transversal and support staff are included in these overall figures. 
7 
 
 
 
4  Work Programme 2019 
4.1  Promoting supervisory convergence 
ESMA will pursue implementing the objective set in the Strategic Orientation to ensure a level 
playing field of high quality regulation and supervision without regulatory arbitrage or a race to 
the  bottom  between  Member  States.  In  line  with  this  objective  ESMA  has  enhanced  the 
planning  and  co-ordination  of  supervisory  convergence  work,  and  will  continue  to  work  on 
having a consistent approach to supervisory convergence across different areas.  
4.1.1  Corporate Finance 
Key objective 
in 
improvements 
Achieve  measurable 
level  of  convergence 
regarding  the  application  by  NCAs  of  the  EU  legislation  on  corporate 
finance matters. Particular focus will be reserved to the development and 
application  of  practices 
transparency  and 
securitisation areas. 
the  prospectus, 
in 
the 
ESMA will increase the level of supervisory convergence in the area of prospectus in order to 
ensure supervision by NCAs in line with the provisions of the new Prospectus Regulation that 
will apply from 21 July 2019. To achieve such an aim ESMA will publish guidelines, review and 
update existing Q&As and potentially issue new Q&As, as well as review recommendations, 
supervisory briefings and opinions to ensure that Level 3 guidance is brought in line with the 
new elements of the Prospectus Regulation.  
The work on the expansion of the current  Prospectus Register with additional metadata, as 
well as publication by ESMA of all prospectuses, will also be completed. 
As  required  under  the  Securitisation  Regulation,  ESMA  will  put  resources  into  ensuring  the 
fulfilment  of  its  mandate  of  supervisory  convergence  in  relation  to  all  competent  authorities 
designated under the Regulation as well as providing relevant input to the  Securitisation sub-
committee to be established under the Joint Committee and any necessary work in relation to 
co-operation with other relevant authorities. In addition, ESMA will be monitoring the need for 
any further guidance (guidelines, Q&A, etc.) in areas related to its competences.  
In addition, ESMA will also monitor the application and implementation of the Transparency 
Directive  in  relation  to  notifications  of  major  holdings,  as  well  as  the  Takeover  Directive. 
Evolutions  of  corporate  governance  related  issues  will  be  monitored  in  the  context  of  the 
implementation of the Shareholder Rights Directive II, including with reference to the review of 
the Best Practice Principles for Providers of Shareholder Voting Research and Analysis.  
Main outputs 
  Update existing Q&As in the prospectus area and publish new 
  Publish guidelines in the prospectus area  
ones (as necessary) 
8 
 
 
 
 
Issue Q&As and guidelines in the securitisation area, 
depending on needs 
  Review recommendations, supervisory briefings and opinions 
  Go-live of new Prospectus Register 
€2,590,826 
Sub-activity staff 
14 FTE 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
4.1.2  Corporate Reporting  
Key objective 
Increase supervisory convergence in the area of supervision of financial 
information,  non-financial 
reporting  and  alternative  performance 
measures  as  well  as  enhance  co-operation  between  accounting  and 
auditing enforcers.  
ESMA  will  continue  to  foster  supervisory  convergence  on  supervision  and  enforcement  of 
financial information and will continue to prepare common supervisory enforcement priorities 
on  an  annual  basis.  In  addition  to  supervisory  convergence  in  the  area  of  enforcement  of 
financial information prepared according to IFRS, where ESMA will continue to have European 
Enforcers Coordination Session (EECS) meetings (8-9 meetings per year), emphasis will be 
put  on  taking  stock  of  implementation  of  the  ESMA  Guidelines  on  alternative  performance 
measures (APM) and non-financial information. EECS will also engage with representatives of 
European audit oversight bodies in order to increase the co-operation.  
Considering the increasing relevance of sustainability issues, ESMA will closely monitor the 
developments  in  this  area  and  promote  the  creation  of  a  common  supervisory  culture  with 
regards to non-financial reporting. 
Moreover, ESMA will increase supervisory convergence by ensuring follow-up of the issues 
identified  as  part  of  the  peer  review  of  the  ESMA  Guidelines  on  enforcement  of  financial 
information. 
ESMA will also continue working in the field of the European Single Electronic Format (ESEF) 
to consider any need to assist market participants in the implementation of the new standard 
and whether any improvements are needed to the RTS on ESEF. In addition, ESMA will co-
ordinate  with  national  authorities’  future  enforcement  activities  relating  to  the  content  of 
electronic reports and the appropriateness of electronic labels (“tags”). 
  Statements on the yearly common enforcement priorities and 
monitoring the implementation of the priorities for the year 
before 
  Publications of selected enforcement decisions 
  Publications of a study on an accounting topic and on 
implementation of the ESMA Guidelines on APMs  
Main outputs 
9 
 
 
 
  Publication of the Annual Report on enforcement activities, 
including analysis of specific indicators of performance on 
enforcers 
€1,193,306 
Sub-activity staff 
7 FTE 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
4.1.3  Investment Management  
Key objective 
Achieve  greater  convergence  and  consistency  of  NCAs’  supervisory 
approaches and practices in relation to the EU legislation on investment 
management, with a particular focus on the Undertakings for Collective 
Investment in Transferable Securities (UCITS) Directive and AIFMD. 
ESMA promotes supervisory convergence of NCAs’ practices in the application of the following 
pieces  of  EU  legislation  and  any  related  implementing  measures:  the  UCITS  Directive,  the 
Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive (AIFMD), the Regulations on Packaged Retail 
and Insurance-based Investment Products (PRIIPs), Money Market Funds (MMFs), European 
Long-term  Investment  Funds  (ELTIF),  European  Venture  Capital  Funds  (EuVECA)  and 
European Social Entrepreneurship Funds (EuSEF) Regulations. ESMA will continue its focus 
on  the  consistent  application  of  the  aforementioned  pieces  of  legislation  and  will  do  so  by 
developing Q&As, guidelines and other supervisory convergence tools. 
The  revised  EuSEF  and  EuVECA  Regulations  set  out  new  powers  and  responsibilities  for 
ESMA. Under the new framework, ESMA will have access to all relevant information in regard 
to  the registration  and notification  procedures of these entities, as well as other  information 
such as annual reports, valuation data etc. This information is to be gathered for the purpose 
of carrying out peer reviews.  
ESMA will also develop guidance on the following: 
(i) 
liquidity stress testing by investment fund managers, building on the work already 
carried out in the context of the MMF Regulation; 
(ii) 
leverage limits under  the AIFMD.  
In  2019,  ESMA  will  finalise  the  creation  of  a  central  database  for  MMFs  and  will  develop  a 
system  to  keep  a  central  public  register  identifying  each  MMF  authorised  under  the  MMF 
Regulation. 
ESMA  will  also  continue  its  work  in  ensuring  supervisory  convergence  on  the  topic  of 
performance fees. 
Activities will also concern the impact of the UK’s withdrawal from the EU on the EU27 markets. 
10 
 
 
 
Main outputs 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
  Go-live of MMF database and register 
  Guidance on liquidity stress testing and leverage 
€3,115,210 
Sub-activity staff 
17 FTE 
4.1.4  Investor Protection and Intermediaries 
Key objective 
Promote  consistent  application  of  MiFID  II/MiFIR  and  co-ordination 
between NCAs in the area of investor protection and intermediaries. 
ESMA  will  continue  its  focus  on  the  consistent  application  of  MiFID  II/MiFIR  by  developing 
Q&As,  guidelines  and  other  supervisory  convergence  tools  concerning  authorisation  of 
investment  firms,  conduct  of  business  and  organisational  requirements.  ESMA  will  also 
support practical sharing of supervisory practices in the investor protection area, specifically 
on home host issues, as well as organise workshops and training. 
ESMA will contribute to the exercise of product intervention powers (own ESMA interventions 
and assessment of national measures) where relevant or necessary, to the management of 
any subsequent workstream (co-ordination of NCAs, any renewals).  
Activities will also concern the impact of the UK’s withdrawal from the EU on the EU27 markets. 
  Q&As Guidelines, Opinions and Statements on MiFID II/MiFIR 
  Opinions on product intervention measures 
  Participation in peer reviews and follow-up to previous Peer 
Reviews on MiFID topics related to investor protection and 
intermediaries 
  Workshops and training sessions on MiFID II/MiFIR topics 
€1,902,282 
Sub-activity staff 
12 FTE 
Main outputs 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
4.1.5  Market Integrity and Market Data  
Implement  data  strategy  following  the  enactment  of  the  SFTR,  EMIR 
and MiFIR reporting regimes  
Key objectives 
Improve supervisory convergence on Market Abuse Regulation (MAR) 
implementation  and  Benchmarks  Regulation  (BMR),  including  on  the 
treatment  of  third-countries,  benchmark  colleges  and  on  the  Short 
Selling Regulation (SSR). 
11 
 
 
 
The  Securities  Financing  Transactions  Regulation  (SFTR), 
the  European  Market 
Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR)  and  the  Markets  in  Financial  Instruments  Regulation 
(MiFIR)  each  establish  reporting  regimes  and  ESMA  will  work  on  ensuring  they  are 
consistently implemented, potentially through guidelines, Q&As or peer reviews.   
ESMA  will  work  on  ensuring  that  MAR,  BMR  and  SSR  are  consistently  implemented, 
potentially through supervisory briefings, guidelines, Q&As or peer reviews. 
The  Benchmarks  Regulation  requires  that  ESMA  participate  in  the  colleges  of  critical 
benchmarks  to  promote  and  monitor  the  efficient,  effective  and  consistent  functioning  of 
colleges across the EU. ESMA may be required to issues opinions on the assessment by 
NCAs to designate benchmarks as critical at national level. Also, ESMA will continue its work 
with  the  ECB,  European  Commission,  and  FSMA  in  the  working  group  on  euro  risk-free 
rates, which is tasked with identifying and recommending alternative  to and fall-backs for 
EONIA and Euribor.  
ESMA’s ongoing work under the Market Abuse Regulation includes facilitating the sharing 
of practical supervisory experience. 
Under SSR, ESMA has the ongoing requirement to fulfil its co-ordination role in regard to 
bans  on  short  selling  and  on  entering  into  or  increasing  net  short  positions,  including  the 
issuing, when required, of ESMA’s opinions. 
  Guidelines on EMIR/MiFIR and SFTR data requirements 
  Q&As on EMIR/MiFIR and SFTR data requirements, and BMR 
Main outputs 
  Q&As and supervisory briefings on MAR 
  Ongoing activities in colleges of critical benchmarks to 
promote consistent application of Benchmarks Regulation 
Sub-activity 
budget 
€1,617,487 
Sub-activity staff 
10 FTE 
4.1.6  Post-Trading    
Provide guidance to market participants and NCAs on the application 
of EMIR and the Central Securities Depositories (CSD) Regulation. 
Key objectives 
Contribute to the consistent application of EMIR and to the convergence 
of  supervisory  practices  for  CCPs  by  initiating,  co-ordinating  and 
conducting  an  EU-wide  stress  test  and  a  peer  review  on  CCP 
supervision. 
The further CPMI-IOSCO guidance for PFMIs will be analysed and further incorporated in 
the EU framework for CCPs where necessary; ESMA might need to give dedicated guidance 
to NCAs for this.  
12 
 
 
 
Under the CSD Regulation requirements, ESMA will develop guidance and implement other 
supervisory  convergence  mechanisms  in  order  to  promote  consistent  application  of  the 
requirements, in particular in light of the entry into force of the settlement discipline regime. 
ESMA will also continue monitoring the level of settlement fails, including producing reports.   
ESMA will continue to prepare and then start co-ordinating the regular EU CCP stress test, 
with the aim of assessing the resilience of financial market participants to adverse market 
developments, as well as preparing and then start co-ordinating a regular peer review on 
CCP supervision. 
  Guidance on implementation of CCP requirements 
  Preparation and initiation of the annual EU wide CCP stress 
tests  
  Preparation and initiation of the annual peer review on CCP 
supervision 
  Guidance on CSDR implementation 
€1,763,318 
Sub-activity staff 
12 FTE 
Main outputs 
Sub-activity 
budget 
4.1.7  Secondary Markets 
Provide  guidance  and  promote  consistent  implementation  of  MiFID 
II/MiFIR in order for markets to become more transparent.  
Key objective 
Co-ordinate to ensure supervisory convergence on the backdrop of the 
UK’s withdrawal from the EU. 
Under  the  MiFID  II/MiFIR  regime  ESMA  has  various  ongoing  tasks,  including  the 
assessment of third-country venues and of waivers from pre-trade transparency as well as 
issuing  opinions  on  position  limits  and  on  the  temporary  suspension  on  transparency.  In 
addition,  ESMA  may,  under  clearly  specified  circumstances,  exercise  temporary  position 
management powers. 
ESMA  has  various  reporting  and  monitoring  tasks  under  MiFID  II/MiFIR.  Reporting  tasks 
include annual reports such as on the use of transparency waivers and deferred publication 
arrangements,  the  double  volume  cap  and  in  the  context  of  the  trading  obligation  for 
derivatives. 
ESMA will continue giving guidance, via Q&As and guidelines, to market participants and 
NCAs on the consistent application of the MiFID II/MiFIR regime for all secondary markets 
and commodity derivative issues. 
If relevant, additional work following the UK’s withdrawal from the EU will be carried out to 
ensure supervisory convergence on the treatment of UK entities. 
13 
 
 
 
  Opinions on position limits, on waivers for equity and non-
equity instruments and on the temporary suspension from pre- 
and post-trade transparency; 
  Assessment of third-country venues in the context of 
transparency and position limits; 
  Annual reports: on double volume cap, on transparency 
waivers (equity and non-equity), on the use of deferred 
publication arrangements (equity and non-equity), on the 
international application of principles laid down by the trading 
obligation for derivatives, on the implementation of the trading 
obligation by third countries benefiting from an equivalence 
decision. 
€1,890,557 
Sub-activity staff 
12 FTE 
Main outputs 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
4.1.8  Cross-cutting supervisory convergence themes 
Key objective 
Promote a consistent approach among NCAs and across different areas, 
foster “real case discussions” among supervisors and enforcers, conduct 
peer reviews, assist NCAs to deal with convergence issues arising in the 
context of the UK’s withdrawal from the European Union. 
ESMA  will continue to  strive for a  consistent approach  across areas through  setting annual 
convergence priorities within a concise convergence work programme. For peer reviews, the 
aim will be to undertake two such assessments in 2019: 
  a peer review on supervisory actions aiming at enhancing the quality of data reported 
under EMIR, and 
  a  peer  review  on  the  collection  and  use  of  suspicious  transaction  and  order  reports 
under MAR as a source of information in the context of market abuse investigations 
Other peer reviews may be launched, including as need be on relocation of business in the 
context of the UK’s withdrawal from the EU. In addition, there may be follow-ups to earlier peer 
reviews. 
Furthermore, in the context of the UK’s withdrawal from the EU, ESMA will foster effective and 
consistent  approaches  by  NCAs  dealing  with  firms  seeking  authorisation  and  relocation  of 
business  in  the  EU27.  ESMA  will  continue  to  foster  intensive  exchange  among  senior 
enforcement experts as well as national supervisors on strategic issues. One of the transversal 
topics to which ESMA is paying attention is to reinforce cross-border cooperation among home 
and host NCAs. 
14 
 
 
 
It is also important to stress that in 2019, subject to resource availability, ESMA will continue 
with  developing  the  Interactive  Single  Rulebook 5  (ISRB).  The  objective  is to  facilitate  the 
consistent application of the EU single rulebook in the area of securities markets by gradually 
providing such an online tool for all directives and regulations under ESMA’s remit. The ISRB 
project began in 2018 with the UCITS Directive and the CRA Regulation and the next focus 
will be on MiFID II and MiFIR.  
  Set priorities for supervisory convergence by publishing the 
2019 Supervisory Convergence Work Programme 
  Reach common views on files where firms seek authorisation 
and relocation of business in the EU27  
Main outputs 
  Peer reviews on EMIR and MAR 
  Fostering more consistent use of supervisory convergence 
tools, including as need be through workshops and training 
sessions 
  Enhanced approach to Q&As 
 
 
4.2  Assessing risks to investors, markets and financial stability 
4.2.1  Data Management and statistics  
Key objective 
Improve  data  quality,  integration  and  usability  to  support  ESMA's 
activities through data management and statistical analyses. 
ESMA’s work requires a strong data and analysis capacity to support the risk assessment 
and economic research but also to underpin ESMA’s policy and supervisory activities. This 
ongoing  task  involves  managing  the  datasets,  including  their  cleaning,  reconciliation  and 
maintenance, by preparing basic and automatised reports as well as sophisticated analytical 
tools and methods. 
In 2019 ESMA will have an enriched dataset whose sources will stem from the previously 
established legislative framework – MIFID/MiFIR, AIFMD, EMIR, and CRA Regulation and 
new ones such as SFTR and MMFR. 
The costs and staff associated with maintaining all ESMA databases (and therefore relevant 
IT systems) are included in the budget and staff for this sub-activity. In 2019 this will mean 
                                                 
 
5 This project consists of publishing on ESMA’s website electronic versions of key level 1 directives or regulations within ESMA’s 
remit,  with  embedded  hyperlinks  allowing  easy  access  to  all  related  applicable  regulatory  or  implementing  measures  such  as 
technical standards, Guidelines, Opinions or Q&As.  
15 
 
 
 
maintaining the 18 databases that have been completed to respond to legislative mandates 
since 2011. These databases are supplemented by commercial data. 
ESMA has been developing and applying data process and statistical analysis to support 
ESMA’s objectives (Investor Protection, Orderly Markets and Financial Stability) in order to 
obtain  synergies  in  horizontal  data  activities  and  to  allow  the  combination  of  datasets  to 
enrich  the  information  content.  The  improving  of  coherence  and  integrity  of  the  whole 
ESMA’s dataset underpin both the quality of the data available to market participants and 
the  wider  public  as  well  as  the  internal  risk  assessment  and  support  for  all  of  ESMA’s 
activities and its support of NCAs. 
ESMA will also continue implementing its Data Strategy that was approved by its Board of 
Supervisors in November 2017.  
  Data processes to support policy, supervisory and 
supervisory convergence activity 
  Ongoing data quality analysis 
  Processing of internal and commercial data and statistical 
generation to support ESMA and NCA activities 
  Maintenance of ESMA’s databases and IT systems 
€10,663,830 
Sub-activity staff 
32 FTE 
Main outputs 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
4.2.2  Risk Monitoring and Analysis 
Key objective 
Identify financial market risks and report on these risks to the relevant 
institutions. 
ESMA monitors and analyses market developments in the light of its objectives of promoting 
financial  stability,  orderly  markets  and  investor  protection.  On  the  basis  of  sectoral  risk 
assessments for the EU, ESMA contributes to the European systemic risk monitoring work – 
alongside  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and  Joint  Committee  (JC)  -  and  to 
international  risk  monitoring  undertaken  by  the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO) and the Financial Stability Board (FSB). The results of this work are 
published in two half-yearly reports on Trends, Risks, and Vulnerabilities and in the quarterly 
Risk Dashboards. In addition, ESMA undertakes impact assessment on upcoming or existing 
regulatory instruments. 
Main outputs 
  Risk monitoring (Trends, Risks and Vulnerabilities Reports and 
Risk Dashboards), including Brexit related 
 
In-depth research / thematic analysis (topics depend upon 
wider context at the time and within available resources) 
16 
 
 
 
  Contributions to risk monitoring by EU and international bodies 
(ESRB, ESA JC, IOSCO, FSB). 
€1,548,429 
Sub-activity staff 
10 FTE 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
4.2.3  Financial Innovation and Product Risk Analysis 
Key objectives 
Achieve  a  co-ordinated  approach  to  the  regulation  and  supervisory 
treatment of new or innovative financial activities and provide advice to 
present to the EU institutions, market participants or consumers.   
Implement the framework for the use of the product intervention powers 
provided by MiFIR. 
ESMA monitors financial activities and retail investor trends, with a particular focus on financial 
innovation including Fintech and crypto-assets. It identifies issues and/or risks connected to 
such activities and trends, and helps to co-ordinate NCAs initiatives on market monitoring and 
facilitating  exchanges  of  best  practices,  including  providing  advice  or  making  proposals  of 
relevant actions where needed.  
The monitoring also helps ESMA to play a proactive role in market intelligence gathering and 
to  develop  metrics  that  will  guide  the  Authority  in  determining  when  and  where  ESMA  will 
employ its own product intervention powers. Furthermore, the monitoring activity enhances the 
capacity to fulfil the responsibility to ensure that NCAs’ use of the powers is co-ordinated and 
coherent. 
  Ongoing monitoring of retail investor trends, financial activities 
Main outputs 
and innovation, including Fintech 
  Ongoing market intelligence gathering 
€1,107,360 
Sub-activity staff 
6 FTE 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
 
4.3  Completing a single rulebook for EU financial markets 
4.3.1  Corporate Finance  
Key objective 
Contribute  to  the  development  of  Level  2  measures  in  relation  to  the 
revised Prospectus regime. 
17 
 
 
 
Following the review of the prospectus regime, ESMA has been asked to  develop technical 
advice on the content of exempted documents, which will be delivered in the course of 2019. 
In  addition,  ESMA  will  potentially  undertake  the  drafting  of  Technical  Standards  (TS)  and 
Implementing  Standards  (ITS)  under  the  voluntary  empowerments  in  the  new  Prospectus 
Regulation. 
Main outputs 
  Possible Regulatory Technical Standards and Implementing 
  Technical Advice on Prospectus Regulation 
Technical Standards 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
€535,158 
Sub-activity staff 
4 FTE 
4.3.2  Corporate Reporting  
Key objective 
Contribute  to  the  set-up  of  high-quality  accounting  standards  through 
providing  enforcers’  views  on  new  pronouncements  and  endorsement 
advice.  In  addition,  ESMA  will  contribute  to  the  implementation  of  the 
Council workplan to tackle Non-Performing Loans (NPL) in Europe. 
ESMA  contributes  actively  to  the  accounting  standard  setting  and  endorsement  in  the  EU 
through  its  observership  at  the  European  Financial  Reporting  Advisory  Group  (EFRAG).  In 
addition, ESMA contributes to the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) in charge 
of  developing  accounting  global  standards,  including  the  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards (IFRS) Advisory Council and in post-implementation reviews.  
ESMA  staff  will  participate  in  all  Non-Performing  Loans  (NPL)  groups  and  enhance  co-
operation  with  the  prudential  regulators  in  this  field,  as  foreseen  in  the  Action  Plan  of  the 
Council.  
It  also  undertakes  single-rulebook  work  in  the  audit  area  by  providing  views  on  relevant 
International Standards on Auditing and by participating in the new Committee of European 
Audit Oversight Bodies (CEAOB), where ESMA chairs the subgroup of International Adequacy 
and Equivalence. 
Main output 
Sub-activity 
budget 
  Technical positions on new IFRS pronouncements and 
amendments 
€527,446 
Sub-activity staff 
4 FTE 
 
18 
 
 
 
4.3.3  Investment Management  
Key objective 
Frame and implement Technical Standards and Technical Advice. 
ESMA will deliver standards, advice and opinions on the following pieces of EU legislation: the 
UCITS Directive, AIFMD and PRIIPs, MMF, ELTIF, EuVECA and EuSEF. There may also be 
some workstreams arising from the CMU initiative.  
The revised EuSEF and EuVECA Regulations  empower ESMA to submit a number of draft 
Regulatory and Implementing Technical Standards to define the information to be submitted 
by EuVECA and EuSEF managers, as well as the conditions for granting authorisation. 
In 2019, there may be additional work for ESMA as a result of the upcoming reviews by the 
European Commission of the UCITS Directive and AIFMD. Similarly, the Commission's review 
of the PRIIPs Regulation may give rise to additional work. On the PRIIPS regulation, ESMA 
will  gather  data  and  information  in  order  to  provide  feedback  on  the  implementation  of  the 
Regulation with regards to its review clause.  
ESMA  will  have  to  provide  technical  advice  on  the  integration  of  sustainability  risks  in  the 
decisions  taken  and  processes  applied  by  financial  market  participants  subject  to  the  rules 
under the UCITS Directive and AIFMD, following the mandate given by the Commission in July 
2018 as part of the Commission Action Plan on sustainable finance. 
Main output 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
  Standards, advice and opinions on fund legislation 
€654,229 
Sub-activity staff 
4 FTE 
4.3.4  Investor Protection and Intermediaries  
Key objective 
Contribute to the development of a single rulebook in the area related to 
the provision of investment services and applying the third-country firm 
regime. 
ESMA will assist the European Commission in the preparatory work for reports required under 
MiFID II or any other work aimed at assessing the impact of MiFID II provisions in the area of 
investor protection and intermediaries. It will co-operate with the Commission and the other 
ESAs  in  developing  or  amending/reviewing  sound  Level  1  and  Level  2  (including  RTS/ITS) 
provisions on investor protection and intermediaries.  
ESMA has also a role in the implementation of the MiFIR third-country regime for the provision 
of  investment  services,  both  directly  (e.g.  co-operation  agreements  with  supervisors  of 
19 
 
 
 
equivalent third countries, and maintaining a register of third-country firms) and indirectly (e.g. 
possible support to European Commission equivalence assessment). 
  Reports required under MiFID II (preparatory work) 
  Register of third-country firms 
Main outputs 
  Co-operation arrangements with relevant third-country 
authorities  
  Support on equivalence assessments of third-country regimes 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
€720,353 
Sub-activity staff 
5 FTE 
4.3.5  Market Integrity and Market Data 
Transpose internationally adopted codes into EU legislation via revised 
Regulatory Technical Standards.  
Key objectives 
Review the third-country regimes for data providers and the Benchmarks 
Regulation.  
Provide MiFIR reports on the assessment of the reporting requirements. 
ESMA conducts ongoing work related to international standard setting on reporting standards 
through  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market 
Infrastructures (CPMI) of International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) and 
Legal Entity Identifier (LEI). This international work will require ESMA to amend EU legislation 
to incorporate the new standards. Additional adjustments to reporting standards under MiFIR, 
MAR  or  EMIR  are  expected.  ESMA  should  also  develop  reports  on  reporting  requirements 
under MiFIR.  
MAR  and  the  Benchmarks  Regulation  might  be  reviewed.  In  that  case,  ESMA  will  have  to 
advise on the possible amendments to these pieces of regulation, addressing specifically MAR 
sanctions. ESMA may also be asked to develop Technical Standards or to revise the existing 
ones.  
In  the  context  of  the  Benchmarks  Regulation,  ESMA  should  issue  advice  to  NCAs  on  the 
recognition of third country administrators. Also, ESMA should be ready to provide advice to 
the  European  Commission  on  the  equivalence  regime  under  the  Benchmarks  Regulation  if 
required to do so. 
In the context of SSR, ESMA may revise the Technical Advice delivered in December  2017 
and/or add new elements to its previous advice. 
Main outputs 
  Advice on the possible amendment of the Market Abuse 
Regulation and Benchmarks Regulation. Revision of pre-
20 
 
 
 
existing Technical Standards or elaboration of new ones may 
be necessary (including SME growth market under CMU 
proposals).  
  Advice(s) on recognition of third country benchmark 
administrators by NCAs. 
  ESMA may revise and expand its previous Advice on the Short 
Selling Regulations.   
  Revised reporting standards / review of Technical Standards on 
reporting standards 
  Provided EMIR Refit is adopted, review of Reporting Technical 
Standards under EMIR  
 
 
€789,787 
Sub-activity staff 
6 FTE 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
4.3.6  Post-Trading 
Review/update the EMIR framework. 
Key objectives 
Develop the relevant reports on post trading matters. 
ESMA might update the Clearing Obligation RTS, depending on market developments, new 
clearing offers or changes to the perimeter of the EU. ESMA will review as well the technical 
standards for CCPs with regards to anti-procyclicality measures. In addition, should EMIR Refit 
be adopted, ESMA might need to work on a range of reports and technical standards. 
ESMA  will  also  develop  reports  on  post-trading  matters,  such  as  reports  under  MiFIR  on 
access and interoperability. 
  Reviewed Clearing framework 
  Reports on post trading matters  
  Provided EMIR Refit is adopted, possibly the development of a 
range of reports and technical standards 
€485,263 
Sub-activity staff 
3 FTE 
Main outputs 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
4.3.7  Secondary Markets 
Key objectives 
Deliver MiFID II/MiFIR review reports 
21 
 
 
 
Revise  the  Regulatory  Technical  Standard  (RTS)  on  the  transparency 
requirements for non-equity instruments (RTS 2) provided that the yearly 
assessment of non-equity transparency supports this. 
Revise existing RTS on MiFID II/MiFIR if needed. 
ESMA will work in 2019 on the MiFID II/MiFIR review reports assessing the functioning of the 
MiFID  II/MiFIR  requirements,  including  aspects  such  as  the  functioning  of  the  consolidated 
tape for equity instruments, the functioning of OTFs, the regime for SME growth markets, the 
impact  of  algorithmic  trading  and  High-Frequency  Trading  (HFT)  and  the  impact  of  waivers 
from pre-trade transparency and the double volume cap mechanism.  
Furthermore, ESMA will carry out in 2019 an assessment of the operation of the transparency 
regime for bonds and derivatives. In light of the assessment, ESMA may revise the RTS on 
the  transparency  requirements  for  non-equity  instruments  to  move  to  the  next  stage  of  the 
phase in. 
ESMA may revise existing RTS on MiFID II/MiFIR and may draft additional RTS on the trading 
obligation of derivatives subject to the Clearing Obligation. ESMA may also need to revise level 
2 rules following any potential impact of the UK’s withdrawal from the EU. 
Main outputs 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
  MiFID II/MiFIR review reports 
  Revised RTS under MiFID II/MiFIR 
€1,391,606 
Sub-activity staff 
9 FTE 
4.3.8  Policy activity to support our supervisory mandates6   
Key objective 
Continue  to  contribute  to  the  establishment  of  a  robust  regulatory 
framework under the Credit Rating Agency, Trade Repository, Securities 
Financing  Transactions  and  Securitisation  Regulations  and  provide 
support to ESMA’s supervisory activities. 
Credit Rating Agencies  
ESMA  will  continue  to  develop  the  CRA  single  rulebook  by  delivering  its  views  on  the 
regulatory framework where required. In this context, ESMA will conduct a stock-take of the 
existing regulatory framework to assess the need for revising Regulatory Technical Standards 
(RTS) such as RTS on registration or fees as well as providing additional guidelines/guidance 
                                                 
 
6 Policy  work  to  support  ESMA’s  supervisory  mandates  is  funded  by  fees  charged  to  the  supervised  entities;  however  these 
functions are performed independently within ESMA and so are presented separately in this work programme. 
22 
 
 
 
in areas such as disclosures or the supervisory approach of fees charged by CRAs for credit 
ratings and ancillary services.  
ESMA  will  also  continue  co-operating  with  EBA  and  EIOPA  to  provide  a  mapping  to  newly 
registered  External  Credit  Assessment  Institutions  (ECAIs)  as  well  as  monitor  the  mapping 
already  provided  to  the  previous  ones  in  order  to  promote  a  consistent  implementation  of 
Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) and Solvency II Directive across the EU.  
ESMA  will  continue  monitoring  and  performing  assessments  of  third-country  regulatory 
frameworks for endorsement decisions as well as  providing on request Technical Advice to 
the European Commission on the equivalence of third countries.  
Trade Repositories, Securities Financing Transactions, and Securitisation Repositories 
ESMA  also  already  co-ordinates  and  contributes  to  regulatory  and  policy  work  streams  for 
Trade  Repositories,  both  in  the  European  sphere  and  at  the  international  level.  With  the 
expansion of ESMA’s supervisory mandates, this policy role will also be extended to the SFTR 
and Securitisation Regulations. 
Main output 
  Clear and common understanding of the regulatory framework 
for CRAs, TRs and Securitisation Repositories: revised RTSs 
and additional guidance. 
4.4  Directly supervising specific financial entities 
4.4.1  Credit Rating Agencies  
Key objective 
Continue to supervise Credit Rating Agencies ensuring lasting impact of 
supervisory activities at individual CRA level.  
ESMA’s  supervision  of  CRAs  encompasses  day-to-day  supervision  through  a  risk-based 
approach and conduct of specific investigations, including on-site inspections.  
ESMA  assesses  registration  applications  under  the  CRA  Regulation,  conducts  perimeter 
monitoring activities, and prepares any necessary reports for the Independent Investigation 
Officer (IIO) where possible breaches of the regulation have been identified.  
ESMA  co-operates  with  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  other  regulatory  and 
supervisory bodies at international EU and non-EU levels including on Brexit-related issues. 
ESMA will also continue assessing Brexit related consequences for UK-based CRAs and take 
appropriate action. 
Main outputs 
 
Investigations, including on-site inspections 
  Monitoring 
23 
 
 
 
  Assessment of registration applications  
  Reports for IIO 
€8,863,937 
Sub-activity staff 
48 FTE 
Sub-activity 
budget 
  
4.4.2  Trade Repositories  
Key objective 
Continue to supervise Trade Repositories under EMIR ensuring lasting 
impact of supervisory activities at individual TR level. 
ESMA’s supervision of Trade Repositories involves day-to-day supervision through a risk-
based approach with a particular focus on data quality, IT and internal controls, governance 
and strategy and conflict of interests. ESMA also conducts investigations, including on-site 
inspections. 
ESMA assesses registration applications under EMIR and prepares any necessary reports 
for the IIO.  
ESMA co-operates with ECB, ESRB, NCAs and other regulatory and supervisory bodies at 
international EU and non-EU levels including on Brexit-related issues. 
 
Investigations, including on-site inspections 
  Monitoring 
  Assessment of registration applications  
  Reports for IIO 
€2,459,339 
Sub-activity staff 
14 FTE 
Main outputs 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
4.4.3  Securities Financing Transactions  
Key objective 
Continue to supervise Trade Repositories under SFTR ensuring lasting 
impact of supervisory activities at individual TR level. 
ESMA will begin  registering and supervising Trade Repositories that will report under the 
Securities Financing Transactions Regulation (SFTR). As with Trade Repository supervision 
under EMIR, ESMA will apply a risk-based approach, focusing in particular on data quality, 
and will conduct investigations and on-site inspections as necessary.  
Main outputs 
 
Investigations, including on-site inspections 
  Assessment of registration applications  
  Monitoring 
24 
 
 
 
  Reports for IIO 
€1,780,550 
Sub-activity staff 
11 FTE 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
4.4.4  Securitisation  
Key objective 
Register  Securitisation  Repositories  and  set  up 
supervision.  
their  ongoing 
The  Securitisation  Regulation  will  enter  into  force  in  January  2019;  it  introduces  ESMA 
supervision  on  the  securitisation  repositories  that  will  host  all  information  required  for 
transparency purposes. In the first year of supervision, priority will be given to registering 
the securitisation repositories and setting up the framework for their ongoing supervision.  
In  2019  ESMA  will  also  finalise  its  development  of  a  register  of  securitisation-related 
sanctions notified to it by NCAs, available to the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) 
and  the  NCAs,  as  well  as  a  public  register  of  all  securitisations  meeting  the  “simple, 
transparent and standardised” (STS) criteria. 
  Registration decisions 
Main outputs 
  Securitisation sanctions register 
  Securitisation notifications register 
€2,782,185 
Sub-activity staff 
14 FTE 
Sub-activity 
budget 
 
 
4.5  ESMA as an organisation 
4.5.1  UK withdrawal from the European Union 
Key objective 
Provide strategic lead, co-ordination and consistency across all Brexit-
related workstreams within ESMA’s remit 
The decision by the UK to  leave the  European Union  will  fundamentally change  financial 
markets in Europe and will have very important impact on ESMA's work in the years to come. 
Brexit is presenting important risks and challenges for ESMA and NCAs, as well as financial 
firms, investors and consumers.   
The impact of Brexit on ESMA as an organisation requires strong internal co-ordination to 
prepare  and  adapt  to  the  changes  in  ESMA’s  external  environment,  as  well  as 
25 
 
 
 
communication with institutional and market stakeholders on relevant issues arising out of  
the Brexit negotiations and/or market developments 
Main outputs 
  ESMA work to ensure appropriate regulatory and supervisory 
coverage of third-country entities post-Brexit 
  Strategic steer to ESMA’s supervisory convergence work on 
investment firms, asset management, CCPs and secondary 
markets 
  Ensure risk and mitigating risk assessments across all Brexit 
related workstreams are executed and followed upon within 
ESMA and via the standing committees 
  ESMA organisational impact assessment and implementation 
of required adjustments to ESMA as an organisation 
  Regular communication with market participants and other 
stakeholders, including relevant EU institutions and bodies 
4.5.2  Corporate Affairs  
Key objective 
Provide  support  to  ESMA  in  its  communications  and  stakeholder 
relations  activities;  governance,  strategic  planning  and  reporting; 
assurance and accountability. 
ESMA’s corporate affairs activity includes providing  active support to the whole of ESMA 
through the following ongoing tasks: 
  Leading on external communications including preparation of key messages, 
media relations, advising and preparing for external speaking events and 
management of internal and external communications channels including intranet, 
website and social media. 
  Co-ordinating, advising and ensuring cross-organisational coherence on inter-
institutional relationships and ensuring liaison with the other ESAs, the ECB as 
well as relations with third-countries. 
  Providing support to the Board of Supervisors, the Management Board and ESMA 
Securities and Markets Stakeholders Group, assisting internal governance bodies 
and providing support to senior management 
  Producing strategic, multi-annual and annual work plans and reporting on their 
execution using performance indicators 
  Ensuring that ESMA’s policies, procedures and applicable laws and regulations 
are complied with; that risks are appropriately and continuously identified and 
managed; that high quality control processes, policies and procedures are 
26 
developed and maintained; and that there are controls around the protection of 
assets and information. 
 
 
 
Main outputs 
 
4.5.3  Legal  
Key objectives 
  2018 Annual Report 
  2020-2022 Programming Document 
  2020 Annual Work Programme 
  2020 Annual risk assessment and work plan 
  2020 Communications Action Plan 
  2020 Stakeholder Relations Prioritisation 
Enhance the legal drafting and soundness of legal acts adopted by 
ESMA.  
Provide clarity on the Authority’s legal toolbox and easy access to all 
applicable acts elaborated by ESMA. 
ESMA’ legal activity supports legal drafting, minimising the risk of legal challenge for ESMA 
and  handling  appeals  and  actions  against  ESMA.  It  also  supports  ESMA’s  legal  toolbox, 
including  the  new  product  intervention  powers.  By  2018,  ESMA  will  have  an  interactive 
Single Rulebook on its website listing Technical Standards and  guidelines, the content of 
this will be kept continuously updated.  
Main outputs 
  Handle complaints/appeals/actions against ESMA 
  Legal sign-off of Technical Standards 
  Updating of tool listing Technical Standards and Guidelines 
 
4.5.4  Facility Management  
Key objective 
Provide proactive support to ESMA by ensuring the smooth running of 
the facilities of the Authority and the acquisition of goods and services, 
in accordance with the EU public procurement rules and procedures. It 
also ensures the health and safety of ESMA staff and visitors. 
The  particular  area  of  focus  for  ESMA’s  facility  management  activity  in  2019  will  be  on 
ESMA's premises. The current lease contract will end in Q4 2019. Should ESMA need to 
move or extend its current premises, the works for the new premises will be mostly executed 
in 2019 for a potential move at the end of 2019. 
Main outputs 
  Premises works and move (if needed) 
  Mission organisation 
27 
 
 
 
  Meeting organisation  
  Facility Management helpdesk 
 
4.5.5  Finance and Procurement  
Key objective 
Further  aligning  the  financial  and  procurement  function  to  the  ESMA 
strategy  by  continuously  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  financial  and 
procurement processes. 
Finance and Procurement activity is to contribute to ESMA as an organisation by managing 
all financial, procurement and contract-related transactions.  
Main outputs 
 
Issuing recovery orders 
  Processing payments 
  Procuring goods and services 
 
4.5.6  Human Resources  
Key objective 
Deliver  HR  services,  enable  ESMA  to  attract,  deploy  and  retain  the 
talents  required  to  achieve  its  objectives,  and  ensure  efficient  HR 
administration  while  at 
the  regulatory 
requirements of an EU authority. 
the  same 
time 
fulfilling 
ESMA is still growing and therefore a large part of its HR activity is related to the recruitment, 
induction and training of its staff. 
Main outputs 
  Recruitment/induction of new staff 
  Training of staff 
4.5.7  Information and Communication Technologies  
Key objective 
Provide  effective  and  proactive  support  to  staff,  manage 
resources in a flexible and efficient way. 
Maintenance and lifecycle upgrade of ICT office supplies (such as ESMA’s staff personal 
computer  and  mobile  devices,  printing  devices  and  supplies, 
fixed  and  mobile 
telecommunication subscriptions). 
Main outputs 
 
ICT Helpdesk  
 
28 
 
 
 
Annex I. Human Resources 
The following tables replicate ESMA’s budget request for 2019 to the EU Institutions and, as 
such, include the resources planned for ESMA in the legislative financial statements attached 
to the ESAs’ Review7 and EMIR 2.2 proposals8:  
2019 Establishment Plan 
AD 16 
AD 15 
AD 14 
AD 13 
AD 12 
1 
2 
6 
2 
7 
 
AST 11 
AST 10 
AST 9 
AST 8 
AD 11 
14 
AST 7 
AD 10 
17 
AST 6 
AD 9 
AD 8 
38 
AST 5 
29 
AST 4 
AD 7  
66 
AST 3 
AD 6 
AD 5 
14 
AST 2 
36 
AST 1 
 
 
 
 
2 
3 
3 
3 
1 
 
 
 
AD total  
232  AST total  
12 
GRAND TOTAL 
244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contract Agents 
2019 
estimate 
Function Group IV 
Function Group III 
Function Group II 
Function Group I 
Total 
44 
48 
 
 
92 
Seconded  National 
Experts 
2019 
estimate 
Total 
22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
7 The ESAs’ Review proposal included 40 Temporary Agents and 16 Contract Agents or Seconded National Experts for ESMA in 
2019. 
8 The EMIR 2.2 proposal included 28 Temporary Agents and 12 Contract Agents or Seconded National Experts for ESMA in 2019. 
29 
 
 
Annex II. Draft budget 
The following tables replicate ESMA’s budget request for 2019 to the EU Institutions and, as 
such, include the resources planned for ESMA in the legislative financial statements attached 
to the ESAs’ Review9 and EMIR 2.210 proposals. The draft budget will be amended depending 
on the final outcome of the EC legislative proposal following the ESA review. The draft budget 
will  not  be  final  until  the  Budgetary  Authority  agrees  it  and  will  be  amended  in  line  with  the 
mandates and resources received.  
REVENUE 
EUR 
Revenue from fees and charges 
15,886,01011 
EU contribution 
38,282,49612 
Contribution from National Competent Authorities  20,217,853 
Contribution for delegated tasks 
1,898,864 
TOTAL REVENUE 
76,285,223 
 
EXPENDITURE 
Staff expenditure 
EUR 
41,196,223 
Infrastructure and administrative expenditure 
16,274,000 
Operating expenditure 
Delegated tasks 
TOTAL EXPENDITURE 
16,625,000 
2,190,000 
76,285,223 
                                                 
 
9 The ESAs’ Review proposal included a budget of €17,726,608 for ESMA in 2019. 
10 The EMIR 2.2 proposal included a budget of €7,986,157 for ESMA in 2019. 
11 Including in 2019 CRA fees (€8,863,937), TR fees (€2,459,339), SFTR fees (€1,780,550) and SR fees (€2,782,184).  
12 Including the EU subsidy under the MFF (€12,569,731), the EU-advance for EMIR 2.2 (€7,986,157) and the EU-advance for 
the ESAs Review (€17,726,608). 
30 
 
 
Annex III. ESMA’s Key Performance Indicators 
ESMA has defined a list of Key Performance Indicators that are reported to the Management 
Board. ESMA’s work programme in 2019 will be measured against these indicators. 
Activity 
Key Performance Indicator 
Non-compliance with guidelines and recommendations. 
Number of peer reviews conducted. 
Promoting supervisory 
convergence 
Number of opinions issued. 
Number of Q&As issued. 
% of IT systems delivered compared to planned. 
% budget execution of IT Work Programme. 
Number of risk topics analysed. 
Assessing risks to investors, 
markets and financial stability 
Trends Risks and Vulnerabilities and Joint Committee (of 
the ESAs) risk reports delivered against work plan. 
Data and Statistics: Coverage of ESMA databases under 
central data management. 
Completing a single rulebook 
for EU financial markets 
Number of Technical Standards and Technical Advice 
approved by ESMA’s Board of Supervisors 
Effective calibration of supervisory resources/tools, 
including enforcement, with aim to ensure independent 
rating-quality oriented culture in CRAs. 
Effective assessment of applications for registration. 
Effective calibration of supervisory resources/tools, 
including enforcement, with aim to ensure good levels of 
TR data quality and stability of TR databases. 
Effective preparation of new supervisory tasks to ensure 
smooth registration process and subsequent ongoing 
supervision. 
  Budget management measures: 
  Rate of implementation of Commitment 
Appropriations 
  Rate of cancellation of Payment Appropriations 
Direct supervision of specific 
financial entities 
Organisational implications 
31 
Activity 
Key Performance Indicator 
 
 
  Rate of budget outturn 
  Rate of payments executed within 
legal/contractual deadlines 
  Human Resource measures: 
  Average vacancy rate 
  Staff turnover rate 
  Staff satisfaction survey 
Percentage of completion of the activities of the Annual 
Work Programme 
Rate of external and accepted internal audit 
recommendations 
 
 
 
32 
 
 
Annex IV. Acronyms 
AIFMD  
Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive 
APM  
Alternative performance measures 
BMR  
Benchmarks Regulation 
CCP  
Central Counterparty 
CEAOB  
Committee of European Audit Oversight Bodies 
CMU  
Capital Markets Union 
CPMI  
Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures  
CRA  
Credit Rating Agency 
CRR  
Capital Requirements Regulation 
EBA  
European Banking Authority 
ECAIs  
External Credit Assessment Institutions  
ECB  
European Central Bank  
ESAs  
European Supervisory Authorities  
EECS  
European Enforcers Coordination Session  
EFRAG  
European Financial Reporting Advisory Group 
EIOPA  
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority 
ELTIF  
European Long-term Investment Funds  
EMIR  
European Market Infrastructure Regulation 
ESEF  
European Single Electronic Format  
ESG 
Environmental, Social and Governance 
ESRB  
European Systemic Risk Board 
ESRB  
European Systemic Risk Board   
EuSEF  
European Social Entrepreneurship Funds 
EuVECA   European Venture Capital Funds 
33 
 
 
FSB  
Financial Stability Board 
FTE  
Full Time Equivalent 
HFT  
High-Frequency Trading  
IASB  
International Accounting Standards Board 
IFRS  
International Financial Reporting Standards  
IIO  
Independent Investigation Officer  
IOSCO  
International Organization of Securities Commissions  
ITS  
JC  
LEI  
Implementing Technical Standard 
Joint Committee 
Legal Entity Identifier 
MAR 
Market Abuse Regulation 
MiFID  
Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 
MiFIR  
Markets in Financial Instruments Regulation 
MMFs  
Money Market Funds 
MMFR 
Money Market Funds Regulation  
NCA  
National Competent Authority 
NPL  
Non-Performing Loans 
PRIIPs  
Regulations on Packaged Retail and Insurance-based Investment Products  
RTS  
Regulatory Technical Standards 
SFTR 
Securities Financing Transactions Regulation 
SR 
Securitisation Regulation 
SSR  
Short Selling Regulation  
TR  
TS  
Trade Repository 
Technical Standard 
UCITS 
Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities 
 
34 
